At this point you might be thinking, we have million token windows now, can't I just put
everything in and skip all this?
Mostly no, those large windows are slow and expensive.
One analysis clogged a long context query at tens of seconds and pennies to dollars
each versus retrieval at about a second for a small fraction of the cost.
And even with a giant window, models still miss facts buried in the middle.
It's a real effect, though how strong it is depends on the model.
So the better teams don't choose one or the other.
They use retrieval to narrow a million documents down to the handful few that matter then let
the large window reason over that focused set.
Retrieval and long context working together.